Add page that compares traditional service function execution to Temporal Workflow Execution (#543)
temporalio/documentation: docs/content/what-are-the-differences-between-temporal-and-a-traditional-system.md

---
id: what-are-the-differences-between-temporal-and-a-traditional-system
title: What are the differences between Temporal and a traditional system?
description: This page compares a function execution in a traditional system and a Workflow Execution in Temporal.
tags:
  - explanation
---

import DetermineHeader from '../components/DetermineHeader.js'

export const headingText = 'What are the differences between Temporal and a traditional system?'

<DetermineHeader
hLevel={props.heading}
hText={headingText}

> />

Reviewer: OK, so it turns out we don't need this at all :)

Author: I'll yank it in my next commit.

The Temporal platform exists to facilitate Workflow Executions.
This page compares a function execution in a traditional system and a Workflow Execution in Temporal.

![Diagram that shows traditional function execution and Temporal Workflow Execution](/img/docs/function-execution-vs-reentrant-process.png)

:::note Legend

λ = traditional function execution  
π = Temporal Workflow Execution  
𝝈 = state

:::

Although the two systems seem similar at first glance, they differ in several significant ways.

> ## Failure

Reviewer: One thing I realized is that we will be saving ourselves some trouble if we try to avoid any headings in the content pages.
Maybe make these sections just **bold text** ?
The page is short enough, I don't see a need for someone to need to link to one of these directly.

Author: For now, let's go with bold. However, we need to circle back on this issue because headings are important for both accessibility and SEO.

In a traditional system, a service function execution (λ) is both volatile and short-lived.

- If a function execution fails, it's not resumable because all execution state is lost. The longer a function execution awaits, the higher the change of failure.
- A traditional function execution typically has a limited lifespan, often measured in minutes.

In Temporal, a Workflow Execution (π) is resumable.

- A Workflow Execution is fully resumable after a failure.
- Temporal imposes no deadlines on Workflow Executions.

## State

In a traditional system, stoppage or failure means that all execution state is lost.
Your application (or a supporting component) must monitor the service's response to initiate a retry of the service execution.
A retry starts from its _initial_ state.

In Temporal, computation resumes from its _latest_ state. All progress is retained.

## Communication

> In a traditional system, you can't "communicate" with a function execution.
> 
> In Temporal, you can use Signals to send data into and get data out of a Workflow Execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a traditional system, passing data to and retrieving the state of a function execution is not really possible.

In Temporal, Signals and Queries enable data to be sent into or extracted from an open Workflow Execution.
```

Hmm... maybe something like this? "Communicate" feels off.

Author: Good call. I'd still like to avoid passive voice, but it's sometimes hard to avoid in technical docs.

Author: Re: "in" vs. "with". I could make a case for "in" because a service function execution occurs _in_ a traditional system (and a Workflow Function Execution _in_ Temporal). If, though, we're effectively comparing the high-level concept of a function execution in both systems, using "with" makes sense.

Reviewer: "in" vs "with" - At that moment when I posted "with" sounded more appropriate...
But I actually can go either way. So, don't feel obligated to keep that change.

---
id: what-are-the-differences-between-temporal-and-a-traditional-system
title: What are the differences between Temporal and a traditional system?
description: Compare a function execution in a traditional system to a Workflow Execution in Temporal.
tags:
  - explanation
---

import DetermineHeader from '../components/DetermineHeader.js'

export const headingText = 'What are the differences between Temporal and a traditional system?'

<DetermineHeader
hLevel={props.heading}
hText={headingText}
/>

The Temporal platform exists to facilitate Workflow Executions.

> Compare a function execution in a traditional system to a Workflow Execution in Temporal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page compares a function execution in a traditional system to a Workflow Execution in Temporal.
```

> ![Diagram that shows traditional function execution and Temporal Workflow Execution](/img/docs/function-execution-vs-reentrant-process.png)

Reviewer: Let's get @dtornow to get us an svg here -
And then we can update this to use the new CenteredImage component when it lands.

Reviewer: svg added

:::note Legend

λ = traditional function execution
π = Temporal Workflow Execution

> 𝝈 = state

Reviewer: In the deploy preview, these are not on newlines. They are all on the same line -
Either separate by one more newline or use bullets I think.

Author: Oops. Added two spaces at end of first and second lines, which in Markdown translates to a newline without starting a new para.

:::

Although the two systems seem similar at first glance, they differ in several significant ways.

## Failure

In a traditional system, a service function execution (λ) is both volatile and short-lived.

- If a function execution fails, it's not resumable because all execution state is lost. The longer a function execution awaits, the higher the change of failure.
- A traditional function execution typically has a limited lifespan, often measured in minutes.

In Temporal, a Workflow Execution (π) is resumable.

> - A Workflow Execution is fully resumable after a failure of any kind.

Reviewer: @dtornow what are the "exact" types of failures that are resumable from?
I feel like I would be hesitant to say "any kind" here.

> - Temporal imposes no deadline on a Workflow Execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Temporal imposes no deadlines on Workflow Executions.
A single Temporal Workflow Execution may live for years.
```

## State

In a traditional system, stoppage or failure means that all execution state is lost.
Your application (or a supporting component) must monitor the service's response to initiate a retry of the service execution.
A retry starts from its _initial_ state.

In Temporal, computation resumes from its _latest_ state. All progress is retained.

## Communication

In a traditional system, you can't "communicate" with a function execution.

> In Temporal, you can use Signals to "communicate" with a Workflow Execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Temporal, it is possible to send data into and get data out of a Workflow Execution.
```

> You can also query the state of a Workflow Execution.

Reviewer: Maybe drop this in favor of the line above.
